Editor
======

Dear Prof. Burton --

Thank for your editorial help with our paper. We appreciate your concern about
our title but would much prefer to keep it as is. We respectfully disagree
with your interpretation and conclusion: we think that the current title *does*
convey the desired scientific information and we do not believe that it crosses
the threshold to being too flippant. We hope you will respect our scientific
and creative sensibilities on this aspect of our work.


Referee
=======

Changes in the text are highlighted in red. Original response from the referee
are included below and preceded by "R:"


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 2.3) The authors describe that their simulation method is similar
to Fardal et al. (2015) except that the authors take into account the complete
disruption of the progenitor. However, the authors also assume that the mass
loss rate of the progenitor cluster is constant in time, which is not assumed
in Fardal et al. I suggest the authors to explicitly mention this point in
section 2.3.

We have added a sentence to clarify:

"This simplification assumes that the mass-loss rate is constant in time; this
is not assumed in \citet{fardal14} but has been shown to closely reproduce
$N$-body simulations of globular cluster disruption \citep{kuepper12}."


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 2.3, 2nd Paragraph) In the 2nd paragraph of Section 2.3, the
authors explain that the velocities of escaping stars are assumed to have "a
small (velocity) dispersion" after the disruption time. I think the authors
should provide more quantitative information on this prescription (e.g., how
small is the dispersion?), since (i) no other papers have attempted to add this
property; and (ii) the most recently disrupted debris partly contribute to the
high-density part of the Ophiuchus stream.

We have updated this sentence to clarify the methodology:

"That is, any star released after $\tau_d$ is drawn from a Gaussian with
positional and velocity dispersion fixed to their respective values at $\tau_d$
with no offset from the progenitor orbit."


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 3, Fig 2) In Figure 2, the authors only showed the sampled orbits
and the data points in (b, d_sun, v_r) as a function of Galactic longitude.
However, since the authors used the proper motion information to fit the data
points with orbits, the authors should present the behavior of (mu_l, mu_b) as
a function of Galactic longitude as well. Showing the panels of proper motion
data is of importance in my opinion, since Sesar et al. (2015) found a mismatch
between the best-fit orbit and the data points in the proper motion space (see
their Fig 9).

We feel that adding the proper motion panels to Figure 2 creates clutter on the
figure and does not add valuable information toward the conclusions in this
paper. However, we do agree that these panels are useful for the broader
context and understanding of the stream and for future observational studies.
We have therefore chosen to include these panels as an additional figure. We
have also added comments to the section that describe these figures:

"As was previously noted, there is a marginal discrepancy between the orbit
fits and the observed proper motions, but it is possible there is a systematic
offset in the proper motion measurements \citep[see Figure~10 in][]{sesar15a}.
We conclude that it is too soon to tell whether there is in fact an
inconsistency."


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 3, Paragraph 1) In the first paragraph of Section 3, it is unclear
to me how the "mean orbit" for a given potential model is determined. I suppose
that the five-dimensional information of (phi_2, d_sun, mu_l, mu_b, v_r) in
Table 4 are evaluated at a certain value of phi_1; but what value of phi_1 did
the authors use?

We use phi1 = 0. We have added a note to the figure caption, table caption, and
paragraph to explain this.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 3, Table 4) "d [kpc]" in Table 4 should read "d_sun [kpc]".

Fixed, thanks.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 3, Paragraph 2) In the 2nd paragraph of Section 3, the authors
claim that "it is clear from these panels that the orbits around Ophiuchus are
generally more strongly chaotic (have lower Lyapunov times) for larger pattern
speeds". However, this statement seems to be too strong. I suggest the authors
to make this statement more moderate. For example, Hattori et al. (2015)
modeled the Ophiuchus stream and found that a difference of Omega by a few
km/s/kpc results in very different stream length (see their Figure 9). Given
their results, I wonder if the Lyapunov time is sensitive to Omega at 30
km/s/kpc < Omega < 50 km/s/kpc. Also, let us suppose that Omega=infinity (or
very large). When Omega=infinity, the potential becomes static and
axisymmetric. So I expect that the Lyapunov time is very long, based on the
authors' calculation of the Lyapunov time in their reference potential (which
is static and axisymmetric). This simple argument disagrees with the
above-quoted statement.

We have tried to make this more moderate:

"From the left column to the right column, the distribution of Lyapunov times
shifts slightly towards lower values suggesting that the orbits around
Ophiuchus are more strongly chaotic for larger pattern speeds (within the range
considered in this work)."

We are only making the claim that larger pattern speeds *within the small range
we consider* are more strongly chaotic. The question of what happens as Omega
tends towards infinity will depend on the resonant structure of the potential
and will not affect whether the number of chaotic orbits will increase or
decrease over this small range of pattern speeds.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 4) It may be worth while adding panels in Figures 5 and 6 that
describe the proper motion distribution of the simulated stars. Although the
proper motion data is not available for the four "fanned" BHB stars, it may be
helpful for the community to understand how the proper motion distribution is
predicted in the chaotic fanning scenario.

We feel that these figures are quite busy already and would prefer not to
include the proper motion panels in this figure. We have included two
additional figures with the proper motion predictions of the mock streams.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 5) In the 1st paragraph of Section 5, it is stated that "If the
cluster progenitor was on a regular orbit, it would have to have disrupted
entirely within the last 300-600 Myr in order to explain the shortness and
density profile." I think this statement is too strong, given that the authors
only tried a single potential model (static potential) in which the orbits are
regular. From the calculations presented in this paper, it is unclear to me if
it is really hard for regular orbits to model the Ophiuchus stream. I suggest
the authors to emphasize that some chaotic orbits can shorten the high-density
part of the stream, instead of stating that the regular orbits can hardy
explain the Ophiuchus stream unless the stream is dynamically young.

We have changed this sentence to include a caveat:

"If the cluster progenitor was on a regular orbit fit to the observed stream
stars in a static, axisymmetric potential model for the Milky Way..."


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 5) The authors state that "stars stripped early will have "fanned"
out and would thus be harder to observe". A similar statement appears also in
the abstract and this statement seems to be the key idea of this paper.
However, it is unclear to me where does this statement come from. In order to
support this statement, it may be better to describe the current-epoch density
structure on the sky (l, b) as a function of released time. For example, it
might be helpful to put a figure showing the density distributions of stars
released at -6 Gyr < t <-5Gyr, -3.5 Gyr < t < -2.5 Gyr and -1Gyr < t < 0 Gyr
for static model and a bar model.

We have updated figures 6 and 7 to color the points by the stripping time. We
have moved the surface density plots to a new figure, figure 8.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Section 5) Does the chaotic fanning scenario requires that the progenitor
completed its disruption very recently? If the disruption was completed at t=-2
Gyr (and the progenitor has not released stars since then), the stars in the
Ophiuchus stream can evolve for at least 2 Gyr. Given that the Lyapunov time is
400-1100 Myr for these orbits, I would not be surprised if the Ophiuchus stream
could not retain its high-density part at t=0.

If the progenitor fully disrupted at t=-2 Gyr, we have found that the stream
doesn't retain its high-density where it is observed today.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Figure 8) In the caption of Fig 8, "(x,z)=(-8, 0) kpc" should read
"(x,z)=(-8.3, 0) kpc".

Fixed.


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (section 6) The authors state that "the orbits of the Ophiuchus stream stars
are likely sensitive to the time-dependence and shape of the bar potential." In
this paper, the authors compared the results in a static, axisymmetric
potential and those in a rotating triaxial potentials. However, it is unclear
if the chaotic nature of the orbit is due to the triaxiality or the
time-dependence or both. I guess that the chaotic nature stems mainly from
time-dependence, but in order to be confident one needs to investigate
non-rotating bar potential (Omega=0) in addition to the bar1-bar9 models. If it
does not take too much time, I would like to ask the authors to explore the
model with Omega=0. If the full analysis will take too much time, then I would
suggest the authors to calculate t_lambda for Omega=0 case and add a few lines
in Section 3.

We have run a subset of the experiments for the case Omega=0 and found that,
indeed, it appears that time-dependence is the main cause of chaos. We have
added a paragraph to Section 3 to explain:

"To understand whether time-dependence or the triaxiality of the bar is the
dominant cause of chaos, we have also performed the orbit-fit and Lyapunov time
experiments in a potential with a fixed bar ($\Omega_p = 0$) at the same bar
angles explored above. We find that the Lyapunov times for orbits fit to the
stream in these potentials are consistent with being regular. Computing the
frequency diffusion rate instead shows that these orbits are likely weakly
chaotic: the frequency diffusion times \citep{apw15-chaos} are
$\approx$$10^4~{\rm Gyr}$. We therefore conclude that the time-dependence of the
bar is the primary source of chaos in the inner Galaxy."


# -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
R: (Appendix B) In the 1st paragraph of Appendix B, the authors need to define
the vector sigma_i = (sigma_DM, sigma_mul, sigma_mub, sigma_vr)_i .

Fixed.
